good morning welcome to breakfast with
charlie state and
naga manchetti our headlines today the
cost
of the coronavirus pandemic the uk's
economy fell by the biggest amount
on record last year as thousands of
businesses were forced to close and we
were all asked to stay at home the
economy shrank by nearly
10 percent its biggest fall on record
wells first minister says lockdown
restrictions could be eased by the
spring as it becomes the first part of
the uk to reach its first coronavirus
vaccine target
new details emerge are the restrictions
to be brought in at england's quarantine
hotels but there's concern
they won't be tough enough i'm
enthusiastic
there must be someone looking for love
in lockdown the search for a soulmate
moves online
for a virtual valentine's day
and if you've fallen out of love with
the cold weather there is something
milder on horizon but you've got to bear
with a few further days of chill
and even some snow i'll have your
forecast here on breakfast
good morning it's friday the 12th of
february our top story this morning the
uk economy
fell by 9.9 last year that is the
largest annual fall
on record now latest figures show that
there were some small signs
of recovery in december not enough of
course to undo the damage of the
lockdown restrictions and the virus
let's talk to ben he's in central london
and has been taking a look at the
numbers and braving the cold up on the
roof of new broadcasting house morning
ben
yeah good morning to you both um you're
absolutely right we've had these latest
figures that tell us how 2020 looked
as a whole we were waiting for the last
quarters official figures so for
october november and december and that
lets us see how
2020 was economically and look no great
surprise that it was pretty tough
many businesses were forced to close we
were asked to stay at home
and therefore the economy could not
function in any sort of normal fashion
uh and at the start of the year the
first two quarters we saw the economy
contract pretty sharply that's because
as those restrictions took hold
by the summer things started to pick up
a bit we were able to eat out to help
out some of the businesses worked out
how they could still operate
within the restrictions and actually
towards the end of the year the economy
grew by
one percent but as you touched on by no
means was that enough
to make up for lost ground so the
economy 10
smaller this time now than it was this
time
last year big questions now of course
about what happens
over the coming months because we know
this latest round of restrictions also
taking their toll
on business they're really struggling to
open up and it's interesting some of the
growth at the end of last year actually
came from
pre-brexit stockpiling so businesses
worried about restrictions on imports
and exports
so they filled up their warehouses and
also massive spending on that government
test and trace program helping to prop
up the economy
so the concern is that without that now
at the start of this year
2021 could be getting off to a pretty
tough start
indeed what within the last few minutes
the chancellor has been
talking about these latest figures and
what it tells us about the economic
recovery
he says look it shows that the economy
was resilient over the winter but
there's still a lot of work to do take a
listen
in today's figure show that last year
our economy experienced a significant
shock and while there were some signs of
resilience
over winter you know what's clear is
right now
many families and businesses are
experiencing
hardship that's why we've put in place a
comprehensive plan for jobs to support
people through this crisis
and we will set out the next stage of
our economic response
at our budget in early march so
chancellor rishi soon out there with his
assessment of what these figures
tell us there is one big a good bit of
good news in all of this is that the
economy avoided what we call a double
dip recession so the recession of last
year and there was fears that it would
tip back into recession
because of these new restrictions and if
that had happened it would have been the
first time
since the 1970s that that would have
occurred
that's not come to fruition but of
course lots of questions
about the year to come just this morning
the
chief economist at the bank of england
andy holden has been talking about the
prospects for the next few months
and he's optimistic he says there's a
lot of pent-up demand there's a lot of
spending that needs to be
unleashed because whilst 2020 was
dreadful for many people's finances
for others it meant they could put a bit
of money in the bank they weren't going
on holiday they weren't spending and so
therefore could save a little bit of
money
so there is an expectation that when
restrictions are finally lifted people
will get back out of
start spending again but of course we
don't know when that will happen and we
don't know how quickly that will happen
and in the meantime for businesses that
are still closed
it's proving to be a pretty tough start
to 2021.
ben thank you very much spoke to the
first minister mark drakeford from wales
a little earlier on we're talking about
reaching
wales reaching the target of offering a
vaccine to everyone in the first four
priority groups and talking about easing
restrictions
let's speak now to our wales
correspondent hal griffith
so how in many ways we're talking about
two significant moments aren't we we're
talking about
uh a milestone in terms of how the
vaccination
rollout is uh working in wales and then
in conversation with us a short time ago
mark drakeford setting out a timeline
yeah and the two things are linked of
course because we were always told that
this lockdown would eventually start to
ease when the numbers fell
but also as the vaccination rate rose
now today
a significant day for the welsh
government celebrating reaching that
first milestone
of offering a vaccine to everyone in the
first four priority groups
so everyone over 70 the clinically uh
vulnerable
and healthcare workers and care home
residents as well
reaching out a couple days ahead of the
target
and now talking about rolling the
vaccine out to everyone else but what
would be the long-term impact of that
when will it mean that the economy can
start to reopen well
mark drakeford told us earlier
cautiously
he thought that some parts of the
economy significantly maybe tourism
could start to plan towards easter
with vaccination and with numbers
falling
provided we reopen society carefully
and cautiously and don't allow the virus
to get away from us
again we can see a path into the spring
where it will be possible for us to go
back to doing some other things
but we're all missing so much
so plenty of caveats then the welsh
government when we came out of the first
lockdown last year
was seen as being relatively slow in
unlocking these measures now we know
that school children in wales
will be amongst the first in the uk to
return the youngest people starting from
february the 22nd
no date yet as to when older people to
go back and certainly no dates as to
where
non-essential retail and shops can
reopen but that other point about
tourism
this is something the first ministers
mentioned a couple of times in the last
couple of weeks
maybe self-catering venues could
potentially look to open
in the easter pretty different to the
moon music we've heard from westminster
have to say
with the transport minister earlier this
week saying people shouldn't even think
about booking holidays
at the moment so there will be some
confusion i think for views as to
whether or not they can book a holiday
for easter and
maybe even for the summer i think it
will all depend on how those numbers
play out over the next few weeks
oh thank you so the first minister was
talking about a
possible easing of restrictions in wales
in the spring there around easter time
what about the rest of the uk
a short while ago the home office
minister victoria atkins told bbc
breakfast the government
won't announce details of its plans for
any easing in england
until it's scheduled review next week
let's talk to our political
correspondent ian watson this morning
morning ian i mean it's the question
that people are asking isn't it and
we're hearing from various
um scientists health officials about
just how long we need these restrictions
to be in place
there's definitely a difference in
towing isn't there an argue between
wales and
westminster very hopeful sounding uh
noises from uh from cardiff this morning
but equally
a far more cautious tone here and it is
the case that some
public health england officials are
talking about potentially
restrictions stay in place until perhaps
september
or october because um that's really when
the vaccination program would be
completed
for everyone in the country uh a lot of
people in the conservative benches that
i can tell you at westminster would be
none too chuffed at that they believe
when the most vulnerable have been
vaccinated in the spring at that stage
the government must start to
commit itself not just to reopening
schools but to reopening
the wider economy but when you were
asking victoria atkins in this program
the home office minister
about some kind of time scale or what
might be realistic her message really
was to be patient
because the government itself she says
is waiting for more data it's
far too early to say why we're looking
this review next week is so important
and the roadmap out of it i mean we we
have to
uh listen to the evidence listen to the
data on this
uh and at the moment we're very much
focusing
on the review next week the road map
being set
out on the 22nd of february and
what flows from that so victoria atkins
the home office minister making it clear
that we're going to have to wait until
the
prime minister sets out his road map on
the 22nd
of this month to get some more details
of how
uh we could come out of lockdown in
england
one thing the government is setting on
today though uh is on the so-called red
list these are the 33 countries if
you've been in them for the past 10 days
and you're returning to england
you're forced into hotel quarantine from
monday
and i'm being told now that that list of
33 countries could be
added to just a few hours notice there
was previously a weekly review
so i think given that we're not allowed
to travel for leisure purposes at the
moment in any case but there's a
further disincentive to international
travel the government taking a hard line
and this
countries could be added to that list a
very short notice and you could find
yourself at very short notice
having to stump up perhaps 1700 pounds
and spend 10 days in an airport hotel
ian thanks for taking us through that
ian watkins there
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news